Chair.
Yeah.
Good afternoon, gentlemen. Leon. Excellent.
Great to have you along. We are just recomme commencing the
afternoon session of our annual review hearings,
and we are pleased to have you here on behalf
of the Antarctic Institute.
We have half an hour set down
for the hearing this afternoon,
and I'm sure members will have a range of questions,
but we welcome some introductory comments.
Can I welcome you both?
Actually, I think to this committee in these capacities.
Leon Grace as chair
and Yori Hendrix as Acting CE Institute,
welcome along to the 2324 Annual review.
Uh, thank you your Honor. Uh, Mr.
Chair, it's in front of you.
Uh, it's been a, an amazing, uh, year for us,
um, with a lot going on.
Um, shortly, I'm gonna ask, uh,
to go give a four minute presentation.
It's an overview, what's been going on Mm-Hmm.
Uh, in the last year.
And we have, uh, um, Peter Smith will help us on, on the,
uh, he oversaw the annual report, of course, our CFO
and all the, some of the financial details.
And after you already, uh, uh, spoken
for about four minutes, I'll cover off some
of the key issues in the, uh, annual report.
Great. Thank you. Good afternoon. Welcome.
Thank you for inviting us here.
Uh, Antarctica New Zealand, as you know,
is officially the Antarctic Research Institute,
and is the crown entity with the principle functions
to develop, manage,
and execute New Zealand's activities in
Antarctic Southern Ocean.
It's also required to maintain
and enhance the quality of science in Antarctica
and to cooperate with other institutions
and organizations, both within and outside New Zealand.
The effort to establish Antarctica New Zealand was signed in
1996, but of course,
we have been present in Antarctica since January of 1957
for every day of every year since that time.
And that was led by Edmond Hillary.
And that base is still there,
located roughly 4,000 kilometers from where we sit now.
Maintaining a presence in Antarctica is a
strategic importance to New Zealand.
Our presence is represented through Scott Base,
and it is in need of redevelopment.
The redevelopment was paused in October of 2023,
and earlier this year, cabinet directed Antarctica
New Zealand to prepare a revised detailed business case
for a rebuild that would fit within the allocated funding.
And since that time,
Alica New Zealand has reorganized its governance
and the governance of the project,
and we are now finalizing a master plan to provide a short
to long-term development
and investment context for the redesign.
This reset is a shift
of construction methodology from a total greenfields
development to a mix of green and Brownfield development.
What that means is that we will be looking
to demolish some buildings, refurbish some,
and build new where we need to.
We'll use a combination of traditional construction
and a more traditional transport methodology using smaller
vessels and, uh, prefabricated where we can.
We really focused on the safe
and successful delivery of Reva
to continue New Zealand's presence
and globally important Antarctic research programs
for the next generation of Antarctic researchers.
In the 2324 summer season, Antarctica, New Zealand,
with the assistance of the Rossi region partners
successfully supported a broad range
of research activities in Antarctica and Southern Ocean.
Our world leading scientists focused on the impact
of climate change and how changing Antarctica impact Alberto
and New Zealand and the rest of the world.
The events spanned from the cycle coast at the southern end
of the Sea Shelf to the northern extent
of Northern Victoria land of Cape DF.
To give you a context, that's like having Scott Base here in
Wellington and operating from Cape Bria to bluff.
So we cover an immense geographic range.
The season encompasses substantial increase
of science activity relative to prior seasons.
This increase of science activity reflects the growing
science demand and the magnitude of scale of the impacts
of climate change in Antarctica.
This especially important
as the impacts become increasingly clear on both
Antarctica and New Zealand.
Antarctica New Zealand continues
to successfully host the Antarctic science platform,
which coordinates the efforts
of more than a hundred researchers.
The main purpose of this work is to understand
how Antarctica and the greater globe will respond
to two degrees warming.
And given that we are fast approaching 1.5 degrees
of warming globally, this is more urgent than ever.
One of the critical projects
that this underpins is the SW two Sea, the sensitivity
of the West Antarctica ice sheet to two degrees, which aims
to better understand the critical tipping points
of the West Anta ice sheet, which represents up
to four meters sea level rise globally.
TKA New Zealand continues to grow
and enhance international collaboration with nations
that share Christchurch as a gateway city,
including United States, Italian, and Korean programs.
We recently signed the MOA
with the Alfred ER Institute in Germany,
and we also celebrated the 10 year anniversary of Cori,
the Korean program in Christchurch.
Anica New Zealand leads our country's representation at the
Committee for Environmental Protection in support
of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade.
At the Antarctic Treaty consultant meetings last held in
May, 2024, our general manager for policy, environment
and safety was elected as the chair
of the Environmental protection, uh, committee
for Environmental Protection
and provides influential leadership
on this at a global forum.
I also acknowledge and thank the New Zealand Defense Force
for their commitment to operation Antarctica
in the 2324 season.
They supported us with their C one 30 Hercules
and the Boeing 7 5 7, as well
as over 200 Defense Force personnel helping both Antarctica,
New Zealand and the US Antarctica program.
Finally, a heartfelt thank you
to our incredible staff in Antarctica,
New Zealand and their families.
As we send many of our staff down to Antarctica for a month
or several months, in some cases 13 months,
it's their dedication
and willingness towards our mission that allows us
to achieve the, the goals that we do together we can
and we will continue to value, protect,
and understand the impressive, fragile
and globally important continent
that is Antarctica. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, I'll just make a very,
uh, couple of quick comments.
Um, with ringing in areas was the Auditor General's comments
that government agencies of all kinds should, uh,
did not be using their annual report primarily
as a marketing document,
but also should be focusing on it
as an accountability inside.
Point you to page 16 of our annual report and the,
and also the notes section on page 63, where we wrote off,
uh, $37 million by changing directions on the rebuild of,
um, uh, of Scott Base.
Um, and so there, there's a mixture of, um, uh, impairment,
uh, and onerous contracts.
So the impairment, there is a proportion of the design,
which was no longer relevant, this proportion that remained.
It was, so, the proportion of the design
that we wrote off was around about $23 million
of work in progress.
And then there are onerous contracts are still under
negotiation, and we are making headway
and reducing the, uh, amount that was in the, in
that was accounted for in the 30 June, uh, accounts.
So we're continuing to negotiate that.
Those, with the, the contracts that we've got, uh,
we are making some progress to mitigate
that 37 million down.
But that is a key feature that, uh, uh, in, in
wanted to raise that.
If you had any questions, I'm very happy,
give frank answers about how that came about.
Very good. Right. Thank you for those comments.
First question from the Damian O'Connor.
Thank you. Um, does Scott, I just need to be redeveloped.
Yes, it does. Uh, I, I think, uh, what was useful, uh,
having been there 10 days ago,
is it's been very professionally managed, um,
over the last decade or so at the end of its life.
But if you go and have a look at each of the patches
as I described, there's a, like,
there's an engineering patch here on the life support
system, you know, the fire system, that generator,
and you walk from ton all the way through
to the Hillary Field Center, and you find you've, you've,
you've caught 50 patches.
And so, um, they're all being done professionally,
but together they represent just an escalating increase in,
in operating cost and risk. So
Why would you claim that the $37 million in negotiated
down as a success?
I haven't said it's a success.
It's, it's a hit that we've had to take.
Um, uh, so I wouldn't claim this a success.
I think what I'd be presenting though is something
that when we realized that the construction approach
that we were taking both in its transport
and in the way that we were building it with large modules,
was not feasible to be able to deliver
that into the budget we had made to make the hard decision.
And then we had to then look at what did that mean in terms
of what was no longer valuable in terms
of work that we'd completed.
So for us to turn to something
that was achievable, we had to take
That hit so achievable for, for purpose.
I mean, it's a fairly harsh environment,
haven't been down there myself.
And so my concern is that, that
what you claim may be success
and that is meeting the, the new expectations of this.
We may end up with a second rate facility, which is supposed
to carry us through the next 50 years, isn't it?
Yeah. I'm, I'm very confident we won't, uh, end up
with a second rate facility at, at at all.
'cause I think it will deliver us, um, uh, all the things
that the scientists need.
And in fact, the feedback we received from scientists
with the feedback we've received from the frontline
operators is, I think this is a more fit
for purpose approach, um, as a building.
So we, we think that it's less
and future proofed and future proofed.
The new building will be future proof,
but we are going to a master plan approach, uh, so
that how do you extend life?
So I would say Scott Base should probably have been rebuilt
10 years ago, but through,
through sweating the asset in patches we've got through
where it's, it's operating, is it,
is it there is an increased risk, but is it a great risk?
No, we'd probably sweat it for another five years,
but increasing operating costs
and increasing risk by doing so.
So when we go to a master plan,
if we're gonna keep existing building,
what life can we expect going?
That comes down to the preventative
maintenance program that we'll have.
And it comes down to having an economic assessment of the
between opex and CapEx and,
and having decent analysis that we know when it is becoming
and getting ahead of the end of life so
that we're constantly over a 50 year period, uh, replacing,
you know, the AX handle and then the ax head
to, we've got a new ax.
So it becomes more sustainable economically
and more sustainable program down on the ice.
So just on that, in terms of the redesign, appreciate,
it's to us to go through a cabinet approval process.
Can you give, give us perhaps some initial indications
of the areas where you've been able to consider a more fit
for purpose solution from
what the original design is looking like?
Yeah, absolutely. So the,
the current master planning process, uh, is still at
that early concept development stage.
Uh, and what that's done is identified the most at risk
buildings and the most critical infrastructure that needs
to be replaced straight away.
That includes essentially the base services, uh,
and the accommodation, uh, and mess areas as well.
So these are areas where we currently have, as Leon said,
a number of patches to keep those life supporting
systems, uh, going.
Uh, and you have to remember that Scott Base
is more than just a base.
It's actually a small town where we have
to manage the water, the sewage, the power, everything
that runs with, with keeping people
safe and alive down there.
So the main service is really critical.
In addition to that, it's also the, uh,
the accommodation part of the building.
Uh, and that's part that will be, uh, a critical part
that we'll be replacing in this first phase
of this master planning process.
All right. Supplementary Dana Kirkpatrick. Thank you.
Um, I guess my question is, are we confident
that the rebuild, uh,
can be delivered within the remaining
budget, uh, and on time?
Uh, yes. Um, I think so.
Um, the, the, what I'd say is we've done a master plan
and then we've asked a quantity surveyor to
take the concepts in the master plan like this in the last
week to give us a rough estimate.
Really, it is a rough estimate.
Um, and I said, yes, this is achievable.
And we've got quite substantial contingencies in, in that.
So we've got quite a lot of headroom that we actually need
to interrogate a lot more.
Next step for us is get of treasury and, and,
and impact for that version of the master plan
and go to a concept plan that gives us more
quantity surveying detail on the pricing.
And so for us, it's like a,
it's an onion we're gonna be going through to get
to total confidence.
We've got detailed business case near the end of next year
where we actually have all the costs. Now down,
That was my next question, was that you'll put
that business case to cabinet in 2025?
Uh, yes, we are. Yes, we are. Yes.
Great. Thank you. Okay,
Laura, and just tos.
And again, on that, I think Mr.
Chair, um, just to set in, how are you confident
or what learnings have you taken from the
previous catastrophe?
I might know, which, um, cost articulation blowout
that you are now able to apply to what you're doing, um,
and how has that process changed?
I guess that we can be assured that some of the things, um,
gonna happen again and
because, I mean, we'll seeing,
hopefully inflation's gonna drop,
but costs could change in the next 12 months.
So it's a lot of things that could happen.
Um, I, I get to talk about that in just a moment.
I think the first thing is the, the risk was what really
drove, uh, the board's thinking,
which is taking eight large modules on a bar
through the Southern Ocean and expecting to a,
but not even come into a fort, but a but, uh, pram point
and have them roll off and up a hill.
Uh, just the environment didn't feel, uh,
that felt like a series of risks that was just intolerable.
And so that was really the first thing that drove us to,
and the second thing was the, just the cost.
Mm-hmm. Of, of three very rounded buildings.
They look beautiful and all that sort
of thing hadn't been done before.
So I think for us, the cost is
deliver the transport conventionally Mm-Hmm.
The way everybody else has done and always has done.
Um, which, which requires a lot of logistical planning,
a lot more logistical planning than than
eight or nine modules.
Uh, and the, the second thing is prosaic build that, um, uh,
again, the way everybody else builds down there Mm-Hmm.
Uh, and where we know the performance of the materials
that we're using as opposed
to using new materials for a Okay.
An iconic build. So those are the two things from the board
perspective that you want to Yeah,
About lessons. I'd
certainly, the other thing I build on there is that, um,
some of the lessons we've taken away from there is making
sure that we more closely embed, uh,
subject matter experts from Antarctica
and from Scott Base into that process
that we are building something that is functional, uh,
is not gonna win a design award,
but is gonna be functional and fit for purpose.
Uh, and also critically is built in such a way
that you can maintain it
and repair in Antarctica, rather being stuck with something
that then would have to be repaired by, uh,
some specialized equipment.
So taking a much more pragmatic, uh,
much more straightforward approach towards that building.
And also on top of that, thinking about how
that can be repurposed over the life of that building
as well, so that we can't necessarily anticipate the extent
of where science will go over the next 50 years,
but understanding how do you make something functional now
that meets the needs now,
but has that ability to be repurposed should those changes,
uh, come through over that time.
The other two things to it,
'cause it's quite a complex, uh, um,
you know, learn, you know, what do you learn?
But, and in the time we've got,
we could talk for a few hours about it.
Um, but I think the other thing we,
we most important we were determined
to do was collapse the governance down
where the board was more actively involved in the
governance, having external some
of the finest engineers we could find permanently on the
board as advisors to the subcommittee.
Um, and then having the project director, um,
and the management, uh,
directly into the board rather than having layers
of governance and expert committees
that we didn't really have control of.
So we made it a lot simpler governance.
I think that was a key, a key learning.
Uh, and the second thing is to not think of ourselves as a,
as a property developer
and acquiring through employment contracts, um,
property development skills, the best property development
people of, with a whole range
of skills work in the top firms.
They don't, they don't look for jobs.
And then in New Zealand, and so going in
and making sure we had strong control over the project,
have more advice, but also going to the market
for the very best people you could get
and the very best firms was another key part of it.
Second, thank you. Dana, did you have your questions?
No, mine was a up, so thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, my question is sort of, uh, leads
to the other, if you will.
So it's two prongs, um, in the reworking of the master plan,
how much engagement was had with other countries
who we obviously partner with and work with down there.
And two, given just the significant investment in this
initiative in the past
and into the future, what of that will be spent
with New Zealand contractors here?
Can you Oh, wow. I appreciate some
sensitivities commercially
and yet to finalize the master plan,
but I guess contractors in New Zealand will be looking
towards how they might be able to contribute
and of course, course works well for our economy.
Yeah, well answer, Peter, you could possibly, we,
we peter's in charge of procurement in inside
of Antarctica in New Zealand, but, um, I think you could,
uh, the likelihood is, uh,
mostly all New Zealanders, isn't it? Um,
Well, certainly the, the, the consulting team
that we're using at the moment are
predominantly all within New Zealand.
Um, so until the, the design is completed and, uh, you know,
and uh, um, and,
and what we're, we're sort of purchasing is clear, um,
then I guess we will have to see where we go, where to go to
for those materials and those construction skills.
Um, but as our chair said,
we're taking a more vanilla approach to construction.
So that tends to lend itself to the fact that those skills
and those materials will be available
in New Zealand. Yeah. But
Of the context of the question is,
I'm picking other countries are similar things, right?
We're gonna have to start redeveloping their bases,
their capacity, all those kinds of things.
And I wondered if there was discussions had,
well, that's already on support of
Each other, that's already happening.
So New Zealand firms are winning contracts at
McMurdo at the most where they're building.
And so, and the other thing is, I'd say, um, on the side
of Antarctica, um, there's three
or four firms who have got really excellent Antarctic
experience and understand how to recruit, you know,
the people that you need down there.
So it does lend itself
to New Zealand firms having, uh, an advantage.
Can you perhaps give us an update on the other portion
of the major redevelopment being the wind farm upgrade?
Obviously that's still continuing.
Um, whilst the Scott base rebuild is being paused,
can you give us some insight on where that's at currently,
uh, from a cost and time perspective as well?
Yeah, absolutely. So, uh, as you'll be aware,
we are also replacing the wind farm.
The current wind farm is, is approaching end of life.
The new farm, uh, will provide three times the power
that the current wind farm does.
Uh, and that is connected into the ri,
the wider Ross Island Wind energy system.
So provides renewable energy for the entire island.
That's both US and the Americans.
Uh, really critical investment from New Zealand
and a balancer in terms that, that joint logistics pool
that we have with the us.
Uh, at the moment where we are is that the, uh,
first foundation has just been completed, uh,
for the first of those turbines.
Uh, and those turbines will be delivered in January
of this year to Antarctica.
They've been procured, they're in Christchurch,
they'll be loaded in January,
and they'll be shipped down to Antarctica.
They'll then be put to one side in the lay down area,
and they'll be installed next season.
Uh, and in addition to the wind farm, we also have a vest,
a battery electric storage system, which allows us
to basically use a battery to store excess wind power.
So you can then use that battery power,
basically get better utilization from that renewable energy.
Can I stop? Yeah, Sure.
Um, what is the cost project with, um, America on
that or the United States?
Are we bearing most of that cost or is it, is it split
and how will it work in the future
with the power arrangement?
Yeah, absolutely. So that project, uh, is currently, uh,
budgeted $59 million,
and that's within the 498
for the entire Scott based redevelopment project.
Uh, that is a cost that we are bearing, just asking.
Um, however, uh, this is part of a wider relationship
with the US mm-Hmm.
Uh, by contrast, the US are investing in a new barge
to allow offloading, uh, this is a critical piece
of infrastructure, otherwise you cannot offload your
vessels, uh, in Antarctica, uh, that has a purchase price
of, I believe 65 million us, uh,
for which we are contributing about $2 million in kind, uh,
through some piling support.
In addition to that, the US also manage, operate, run, uh,
the, the landing facility,
the entire runway, the roading network.
Um, they also provide the, the largest share
of all the air transport to and from Antarctica.
Mm-Hmm. Um, so this is a, a part of our relationship
to provide that renewable energy into this collective.
Cool. Thanks. Right. Tim
Costley, Um, perhaps not as glamorous
as the exciting new Scott base street development,
but can we talk about the science, um, just for a minute?
And, uh, just reading,
I was hoping you could help me understand a couple
of bits out of the annual report where you talk about,
it's obviously, um, clear
that your scientific workers aligned
with government priorities 21 to 30,
but there's a couple of measures where it's just, um,
in the amber range around transparent, um,
process for allocation of logistics
and also around, uh,
ensuring performance measures are delivered in full.
Can you just help us to understand
what that means in real life?
Yeah, absolutely. Um, I'd argue that the scientists one
of the more glamorous parts of that.
Um, but certainly, uh, I
Think so That's fine.
Um, certainly, so a big part of this is obviously
that Antarctica New Zealand is the host
for the Antarctic Science Platform.
Uh, so that's a $49 million seven year, uh,
strategic science innovation fund.
So CIF fund from mb, and we are the host
and we support that science
through Antarctica New Zealand. Uh, in, in terms
Of, and that's why you get assessed on
allocating logistics rather than actually doing it, right?
Correct. Correct. We, we, uh, have a measure
where we look at what our performance rating is from the
events that we support, and we strive
for an 85% satisfaction rating on that.
We did not quite achieve that,
which is why it is amber Mm-Hmm.
And a big part of that is that we relied on a, uh, twin,
a small fixed wing aircraft last year.
Uh, and that was unfortunately delayed by 19 days.
Um, we plan for some delay.
We have contingency in our, in our planning systems, uh,
we normally plan for a week or or so of delay,
but 19 days was really quite exceptional.
And what that did is it meant that we had
to do a little bit more on the fly reprioritization
of some science events on the ice to make sure
that the majority of people could
achieve their science outcomes.
As a result of that, not everything was achieved.
And that's reflected then in that orange rating.
And, and, and so that's the allocation of logistics.
The second one, which is
around ensuring annual key performance measure
that's delivered in full, which the last two years has been.
Amber, is there something deeper going on there,
or can you help us understand?
No, there's there, there's nothing deeper
going on there, per se.
Uh, so what we do have as part of this is that, uh,
we are the host for the impact science platform,
which is our largest component of funding
that we support roughly 60%, 50 to 60% of the science
that we support is through the Antarctic science platform.
Part of this is that their reporting window is offset from
our reporting window, so we don't get full visibility on
whether everything is achieved.
That's part of that. The other part of that is
that there were some things that were rolled into the
following year, but we'll still be done
within that seven year period.
So there's a, a temporal variance
is how I would answer that question.
Yeah. Okay. But if it's, uh, I'm just thinking that
if it's a reporting alignment, you know,
aligning reporting periods,
then surely one would catch up for the previous years.
There must be some way to present that in a way.
I, I guess just it in a way that you are considering
what was done in the period, you can see the results
for you do have control over, or
Yeah, some, so some of these, the final parts
of those KPIs we reported on this year, as that is the end
of this first seven year transfer funding.
Uh, and, and we, we are tracking very well on those KPIs at
this point and picking up from those ones from last year.
Okay. And, And maybe further context for those
that KPI set, the, we have an extensive list of KPIs
for the platform with MB 20.
All in all. So when we say we're partially achieved,
we achieved 18 of those.
Um, so I, I, the, the, the remaining two,
as you already explained, um,
but predominantly substantially all of the
KPIs have been achieved and delivered as planned.
Okay. Thank you. And I know
that the committee really enjoyed the, the brief,
particularly on the science and the, and sea level rise
and things that we got down there
earlier this year. So thank you.
Great. The, um, the 19 days of third due to weather, uh,
last, last year was quite extraordinary.
This year is actually having a much better run
and getting people to cape a deer out
to side coast up to the top of Abu.
So we're actually not being as nearly as hampered.
So every year is very different.
Back to the, yeah.
The puppies with the highlights of the visit puppy.
There's a puppy here. Beautiful.
Hey, just had a couple more questions if we can, on the,
uh, wind Farm upgrade.
Um, appreciate it's underway at the moment.
Um, some good progress happening down there.
Just had a couple of other aspects that, uh,
for me need a little bit of clarification around the,
the timing or,
or your level of confidence in being able
to deliver within the existing budget.
Um, and whether that includes,
we understand it includes the battery, um,
but the potential upgrades to the existing line system
to actually be able to feed that additional power to
both McMurdo
and Scott Base, recognizing that, of course,
they operate at different frequencies
as well. Is that part of
The Yeah, budget.
I, I think the, I, I'll just, um, um,
we are very pleased about five,
six weeks ago our team picked up that we needed
to do more electrical engineering planning work around them.
So that process got underway.
We'll probably be talking in about a week's time,
but I think, uh, that's overview where that's,
that you can get the specifics of what we know today,
but that work is in hand, particularly reaching out
to the US program about what they all need to do
to take full maximum value out what we've invested.
Yeah, absolutely. I think
what we're doing here is we're basically providing energy
for future proofing of renewables into Ross Island.
So that future proofing out, uh, allows us
to provide a large amount of renewable energy
that will allow both McMurdo
and Antarctica New Zealand to really make sure
that future investments in terms
of power usage are optimized to use
that power that's available to us.
Uh, at the moment, the US uh, uses a lot
of diesel generators, uh, that provide excess heat, uh,
to provide heating into the base, uh,
with this additional renewable energy.
There'll be a conversion of that to be able to utilize more
of that renewable energy.
It makes basic sense for them.
If they can use less diesel,
then they'll need less vessels coming down
to deliver less diesel and also
reduces our carbon footprint.
Mm-Hmm. Which is something that we're all
interested in. Mm-Hmm.
I think the other two, I think happy to come back
to the committee with a written report
and about, you know, either just
before Christmas is maybe immediately
after Christmas, uh, on where we're at on that, I think
because we'll have a lot more information
and we've got contingencies there,
and we'll be able to also give you an update on
where that budget is landing.
Yeah. There'll be things like the Americans will have
to invest in a bigger cable from the, from the,
from the wind farm down to their base.
Um, so
That'll be their cost. Cost
Or our, yeah, that's, that'll be their cost.
It'll be their cost, but you
know, we just need to program that.
And then there's the issue, which I think, you know,
you were aware of, which is the sequencing of
how we cut over from the old turbines to the new turbines.
Yeah. That works in train in any
of the cost implications we
can report back to the committee.
Yeah, that's right. Well, the last thing we want is
to have three wonderful new turbines standing with capacity
to produce, triple the production,
and yet not be delivering that
because the electrical engineering work hasn't been done
to actually hook into the prospective grids.
Absolutely. Especially since you're taking the existing ones
offline before the new ones come online.
That's right. And so there will be a reliance on 100% diesel
generation through that period,
And we are working out how to balance that
and to minimize the gap.
Okay. So, excellent.
I'd be happy to, happy for us to provide a written report
to you when we've, when we've got
the certainties around those things.
And then, sorry.
No, it's, sorry, Karen, I just have one final question.
In relation to the, uh, amount
that has contributed towards maintenance of Historic
Huts down the ice, obviously some incredible
heritage down there from, uh, a long time ago now, it seems,
um, we're contributing to that
through the Target Heritage Trust.
Um, what sort of cost is that, is a portion of,
of the overall budget?
Good question. It, it is a
Good question. I I don't
have the, the actual sum,
but we contribute fundamentally by, um,
logistics support supporting the conservatives from the
Antarctic Heritage Trust to go south to sort base, um,
to get to, to the various, uh, huts
that they need to, to do their work.
Um, so it's a combination of, you know, access
to our logistics chain and some limited helicopter time.
So we're maintaining obviously the huts
on Ross Island there.
That makes good sense. That's right.
Where we are, uh,
we investing additional costs in maintaining other huts.
I, I think that you have in mind there,
it's the 100 paper dear.
Uh, and that is certainly, uh, a lot further away.
That's 750 kilometers as the, uh, skewer flies, um,
from Scott Base to that location.
Uh, and that comes at significant additional cost
that we are bearing this current financial
year, uh, to support.
Uh, we don't have a final number on there.
Um, but we will be able to understand what that is costing.
Mm. Uh, and whether that's something
that we can continue to support or not.
Yeah. Look, I think the
committee would be interested in that.
It's a heart that is a long way from us
and I don't see the direct connection
for us maintaining that hut.
I understand obviously this Redman Hillary hut,
it makes sense as right near us, as long as well
as the Scott and Shepherd and Huts,
which are very near us on Wests Island.
But yeah, interested in understanding
that additional costs we're putting into
maintaining a hut further afield.
Absolutely. We're gonna explore that
with the Antarctic heritage, uh, trust, um,
'cause there might be other smart ways
of actually supporting them to do that,
that don't come at air transport, which is a very expensive,
and, and so what ship borne stuff can be done where,
you know, we can support them, uh, that,
and it might mean that it's a slow development time,
so we might take eight year
or six year, I don't know, I'm making it start,
but it, instead of a four year, uh, conservation period
and restoration period, it might be a couple years longer.
So we'll have those conversations with Heritage Trust
and make sure that they achieve their goals. Yep.
Final question, Damien O'Connor. Well,
Thank you. In spite of, I,
I know you've not come
to do a promotional gig, but you might as well
Won. Can't,
But I was actually quite surprised by the number
of helicopter hours being that relatively low.
Is, is that always been about that level
or that depend on the,
The, Yeah, so in, in that last year,
I believe the number was 167.
Yeah. Memory serves me. Right.
Um, so, uh, that is in part
because we also have a fixed wing, uh, that allowed us
to do some deeper field, more remote locations, uh,
that we may have tried to use helicopter hours before.
Uh, helicopters are obviously expensive to run.
Uh, so we do have a natural cap at which we can't exceed
for our sale, uh, are are too high.
So the intra continental aircraft hours
that's getting to and from
There is both, Or that's within the, the internal.
So we have intra is within the,
So, so that's and bas where you've got that one.
Correct. Okay. Thank you.
Alright, well that brings us to the end
of our session today.
Thank you very much for coming for the committee
to give us an update and please pass on our thanks
to the team doing amazing work down there on
behalf of all of us.
It was incredible to have the opportunity to get down there
and see that firsthand, you showing off since you got back.
Great insight. And it was very good appreciation
of the challenges and the opportunity.
Well, no, thanks for me struggling to understand it. It
Was a pleasure to have you down there, Tim.
And, uh, yeah, we enjoyed being able to show you the,
the context of what we do, uh, and also those challenges.
Uh, we didn't send these before,
but if we can, we'd love to leave you
with the science achievements report from the last year.
I believe you have the annual report,
but this provides a little bit more detail on some
of the other aspects that we're, we're
Doing. Wonderful. Thank
You. Thank you very much. Appreciate
It. Looking
forward to visiting, right?
You come now to the hearing with NZ Trade and Enterprise.
You just, you've, you just went down in,
see all the pictures?
No, I was scheduled to go one, one time, one point in time
and stink.
It's not a once in a lifetime opportunity. Worry about it.
Oh, I think so.
Right. Good afternoon.
Welcome to the Foreign Affairs Defense and Trade Committee.
We have half an hour sit down
for all this afternoon's hearing.
Uh, sorry. An hour should say. Knocking off that excited.
Got all excited there.
Wouldn't you saw the, the eyes light up?
Um, so look, we welcome your introductory comments.
Uh, feel free to introduce any of your team with you
and then we can delve into questions from the committee.
Thank you. Thank
You, chair Koco.
Thank you for your welcome. It's a pleasure to be here, uh,
here today on behalf of New Zealand Trade and Enterprise.
I'm Jennifer Kerr, the chair,
and alongside me is Peter Crisp, chief Executive.
Let me start with the opportunity and the challenge.
Exports are critical to New Zealand's economy, delivering
around 95 billion, applying one in four New Zealanders.
The export economy also includes some of the most productive
and competitive parts of our economy.
However, as small domestic market
and relative long distance from other countries means
that kiwi businesses are big challenges.
Small, small businesses quickly outgrow the domestic economy
and have to become export ready a lot sooner than in other
smaller advanced economies.
This challenge defines our purpose.
We are here to support Kiwi businesses to scale
and to grow internationally for the good of New Zealand.
Despite challenging conditions,
NZTE had a strong year in 2024.
We helped New Zealand businesses deliver over 1500 deals
generating 3.81 billion in export value to New Zealand.
Achieved a record 2,771 international growth outcomes.
These are such things as new channels to market,
new employees, finding partners, that kind of thing.
On the investment side, we supported 81 investment deals
that resulted in the potential direct economic impact
of 4.5 billion against a target of 2.7 billion.
And the number of investment deals in the pipeline increased
to around 145.
In addition, NZTE is supporting the government's drive
to significantly increase the number of trade missions
to reconnect with key international markets,
showcase our expertise and open doors
to commercial opportunities for our exporters.
To date in this parliamentary term,
NZT has supported eight successful missions,
which have touched Australia, USA, Singapore, Thailand,
Philippines, Japan, Malaysia,
South Korea, Brazil, and China.
And they have generated 105 commercial outcomes.
Like the rest of the public service.
NZT also did its share of cutting costs.
We reduced 54 million per annum of COVID-19 response funding
and then responded to the current government's cost saving
savings requirements.
This all resulted in a total of a hun of
around a hundred roll reductions across NZT
equaling about 13% of total roles.
As a result, we are now committed
to delivering more with less.
This has required focus, innovation
and technology to ensure we lift productivity
and continue to deliver the exporters.
Looking forward, the government has laid out the ambition
to double the value of exports over the next 10 years.
This has been a rallying cry, increasing the aspiration
of both NZTE
and many of our partner agencies like NPI,
nfat Tourism Education New Zealand.
This ambition is also resonating
with the private sector as well.
For our part to lift
that impact NZT has doubled down on our core operating
model, which includes segmenting, ambitious innovator,
knowledge intensive exporters,
and getting in the behind them to help them grow.
We are committed to delivering an enhanced range of services
and support both in New Zealand and international.
Looking ahead, challenges do remain.
We've got geopolitical tension tough globally
and tough globally economic conditions.
We are seeing slowing global growth
and rising protectionism in many markets.
That being said, we are also seeing many new niches being
pursued by New Zealand exporters
and overall positive sentiment is rising.
So some early times of an export lead recovery.
We look forward to your questions chair.
Excellent and very much right questions for NZTE.
Lauren Nan,
I will start. Thank you.
Um, thank you so much for coming,
apologies for being a little bit late.
Um, just on your last point in terms of protectionism
for different markets, um, one of the things we're also sort
of trying to tease out with the minister this morning was
around the fact that you see, um,
changes in political system, for example, that we,
with the recent US election, would
that actually provide an opportunity
for New Zealand businesses
because of the fact that you're gonna see us
and possibly China tightening import from both
exports from both countries?
Do you see that as an opportunity for New Zealand
Potentially?
Uh, it is very, very early to call it in terms of
what the impact might be.
Um, and yeah,
because we don't know what the tariff regimes will be,
we don't dunno what the relative tariff regimes will be.
You know, what will happen to Australia, uh,
in a business round table we had last week,
uh, was very interesting.
How much of the discussion was actually about China
as you're talking about the US tariff situation
because a lot of our New Zealand companies, uh,
export into the US from China.
Mm-Hmm. So they've got the manufacturing in China.
Uh, but also, you know,
if China trade goes down in the US then there's more super
capacity in China, uh, that we start competing with.
And then also, if China then is motivated to go
to other parts of the world, we will be
competing there as well.
So, and Natalie will have an impact,
but it really depends on what the regime is.
And we just, we just don't know.
Devil's gonna be in the detail on that one.
Just one supplementary question on that Mr. Chair.
'cause I'm sure other people ask more about in terms
of the IGF and some of the, some of the, um, programs
or projects in there.
Speaking of the conversations being on China,
what I'm not seeing in, for example, the annual report,
et cetera, is do you have a breakdown of what proportion
of some of these projects and programs
and businesses that are receiving fundings through IGF
or et cetera that are from the more diverse communities
rather than being specifically thematic like
tech and et cetera.
Do you know if they are going to be locally owned,
south Asian businesses,
east Asian businesses, smart businesses?
Do you have any of those numbers?
Do you mean a customer?
The, the, the makeup of our customers?
Well, no, the makeup of the, I guess some
of the investments that the projects
that NATE helped you invest domestically in New Zealand.
Do you have a breakdown of these, some of, some
of these businesses in New Zealand, whether they're,
although they're locally owned, um,
but do you have any, to put it bluntly, ethnic breakdown
of the ownership of some of those companies?
The founders? Yeah, I think we know,
we know something about gender.
Uh, we know, uh, we ask which ones identify themselves
as Maori businesses.
I don't know if we have any further breakdown on that.
Uh, no, we don't, uh, record ethnicity of the company.
Uh, when we had the, uh, ethnic conference,
uh, a few weeks ago.
Um, were you there or not?
So I did a presentation to that conference, uh,
and we talked about, um, the need
to start getting a better grasp on what some of the ethnic,
uh, distribution is of those companies.
'cause at the moment, uh, that those stats aren't,
aren't gathered, we, we know exactly
what markets they're going to.
Yeah. We know what proportion of, uh, companies are going
to the ethnic markets.
Uh, we know those sort things. We just dunno the ethnicity
we the owner of the company.
So if that's the case, then how do you identify a business
as being a Maori business?
Uh, well, we do understand if it's Maori,
but there, there is a definition of what ethnicity is,
uh, under the act.
And so that's, that's what we're
presumably what the question was about. Uh,
So you can identify that ethnicity,
but not other ethnicities.
Mm-Hmm. We identify the companies that are Maori,
the ethnic companies are the ones that are coming from, uh,
Asia, Africa.
Mm-Hmm. Um, there's a definition of of ethnicity that's
outside of the definition of Maori. Right?
Yeah. It's a formal definition.
Mm-Hmm, yeah, Yeah. Under the act. And
Sorry, what is that?
Can you just give us those, those are the countries
that are defined as the ethnic countries.
Mm. Uh, so it's not granular to which countries Yeah.
It's just Yeah. Categorized as Yeah.
There's a list of countries that, that are called the,
are the, are the ethnic countries.
Right. Sorry, just to supplement on that
and just to express why I'm interested in this particular
question is we know that, for example, that China is one
of our, you know, biggest export market and all of those,
and so is India, et cetera.
But I want to know from an N Z's perspective,
how then are we supporting locally based Chinese businesses,
Indian businesses in terms of their endeavor
to export back into their, back into their source country,
for example, where you see possibly similarities of culture
and language, et cetera, that, you know,
does NCT facilitate?
I can't identify and facilitate some of that growth ally.
I understand. And we, yeah.
And we have got many, many companies, uh, Indian companies,
Chinese companies, uh, and founders and,
and entrepreneurs from all sorts of different ethnicities.
We just don't know portion of that. We just
Can't count them. And this is
specifically to the IGF
I'm asking. Yeah, yeah. Yeah.
That's fine. Yeah. Cool.
Thank you. Thank you.
In relation to your customers, how do you, um,
I guess determine when they are ready
to move from being engaged to focus customers?
I understand you're now looking to create a new segment,
engaged plus within that.
Can you talk us through a bit of that, um,
I guess triaging process of your customers?
That's a great question. I'm, um, I'm delighted
that Selectivity knows about focus on engaged customers.
That's fantastic. Um, look, just to maybe just go back
and just say, what, what is the dilemma
that we're trying to solve with that?
And then I'll get to answer the question. Yeah.
So, um, the fundamental dilemma we've got is 12,000 exports.
Mm-Hmm. Uh, 11,000 of those under $5 million export revenue.
Only 300 are above $25 million export revenue.
So the shape of our export triangle,
it's got a very, very wide base.
It's got a very high peak, which is Fonterra, uh,
and it's got a very narrow waist.
And that is the, is the chair set in the opening remarks.
The dilemma is that, uh, trying to grow a company,
a small company from, uh,
with a very small domestic market out into the world
is incredibly challenging.
So our triangle is way more constrained in the middle
of it than any other export triangle in the world.
It's quite unusual because it's so,
so hard to grow from New Zealand.
So that, and that essentially is the dilemma.
I think it's one of the big productivity dilemmas
of the entire country because given that productivity is
proportionately higher in the export sector than elsewhere,
um, then the lack of exporting, it's actually a, a,
generates a lot of productivity for the country as a whole.
So what we do, we know we're only a, a reasonably boutique,
small organization,
and we don't, we can't grow 12,000 companies
because we know that, uh,
the only way we can really make a difference is fully focus
on a specific, uh, company
and give them full attention, full wraparound support,
maybe some co-investment or, or whatever it is.
So the number that we have chosen is 1000 companies.
So those 1000 companies, they have to be on the sort
of value add spectrum.
So knowledge intensive, innovative, uh, companies,
they must have ambition
and prepared to put their own money into growth.
Uh, 'cause it's not a subsidy, it's not corporate welfare.
We are kind of backing those companies that back themselves
to grow in the right part of the economy.
So that's the thousand, that number was originally, 500
went under 700.
Uh, the previous, uh, government went up to then up to 1400
during the Covid period.
And we've now taken that back down to a thousand.
The more we have of those, the better.
But we can only have as much
as we can actually get the funding for.
How many of those 300
with greater than 25 million revenue are in the folks group?
Uh, uh, half
of them are less than $5 million export revenue.
And we have a very small smattering them, uh, above the,
you know, in the dozens of companies above, uh,
300 million say.
But a lot of them are in that, you know,
in the middle of that triangle.
It's a group that's chosen from the small
to the middle of the triangle.
We don't really stand to grow the big companies
'cause we think they've got enough capacity
and horsepower themselves.
If anything, they actually add back into the system
and help some of the smaller companies. Okay. So
Delights of Fonterra, they're not in your focus?
Uh, no. We, we will work with them on particular projects
and stuff, but we don't make them, uh,
we don't hunt them out to be, to be the focus customer. But
Are they listed as one of the focus customers?
Uh, I think Fonterra Brands is, um,
and like Silver Fern Farmers,
but the only part of Silver Fruit Farm we work
with is the value add part
of Silver three five answer the answer.
The question that was asked is the long answer.
Um, so that's the thousand
and yeah, we are fully committed to that.
But then, you know, there's another thou, uh,
5,000 companies that get a very light touch service.
So this is, um, uh, online help, um, all sorts
of materials, research materials.
They also get a little bit of access
to people in international market.
Uh, and there's effectively two grades in there.
There's a very, very light touch called Engaged.
Uh, and then there's, um,
gets slightly more attention for the Engage Plus.
And the Engage Plus is really the launching
pad into the focus group.
'cause the focus group's got about a 20% churn on it.
So it's churn time companies go broke
and other things happen there.
Uh, so the Engaged Plus allows those companies
to move up into that group.
That's the basic segmentation that we deal with.
All all designed to ration scarce resources, resources
for the maximum impact to help scale companies.
So are those engaged plus, are they chosen
by you from the engaged pool
because you identified them as having more potential?
Or are they putting themselves in that position
by action that they've taken?
Or is it particular industries?
Uh, it's not, not particular industries.
It's very broad, broad church.
It's, uh, more ones who are a keena, uh, more ambitious.
We need to make their own investment. Mm-Hmm.
Um, that's, that's the ones that we're really,
really sort of elevating up.
And you can tell. I mean, they get, yeah.
Again, because, uh,
'cause a lot of these companies are quite small
and they haven't really cut their teeth on a very
competitive domestic market.
A lot of 'em, you know, are just going to market.
They need a lot of capability building in
New Zealand, uh, to help 'em grow.
So we do a lot of that sort of work.
But then the, the ones that are really ready
to go are the ones that sort of start climbing up
through the system and then they
graduate out as well. Mm-Hmm.
Because they need so much work, we can really only work
with ones who are super ambitious themselves.
Sure. Because otherwise you're dealing
with two dilemmas capability, problem,
and an ambition problem.
Mm-Hmm. Yeah. Look,
Look, thank you very much.
And Pete might have heard a few of these, uh, questions
before, um, uh, Fonterra.
So in or out, I've, I've asked that question before,
but Fonterra Brands is in, um, and they're gonna be sold.
They say that they can't successfully
sell brands from New Zealand.
What does that say for the hundreds of other food
and beverage firms who are trying to do this?
Should they give up given Fonterra has been trying
to do this for a long time, assisted by yourselves,
still being assisted by yourselves,
and they say they can't get the returns they need.
I'll make a comment and then people have no doubt more
to say is that, um, one
of the differences I think is our comp,
our smaller companies tend to be in niches and,
and do well in a particular niche font.
Ontario brands, um, as you know, I used to work there,
you know, their brand span a lot of, a lot of niches.
So they're up against multinationals like
Nestle and so forth.
So I think the niche has got something to do with it.
Well, thinking, I guess, I guess this is,
this is a critical area.
Sorry Mr. Chairman of my mind because,
'cause it is, you know, when our single biggest company
says it can't compete to move from, it's,
it's, they have value.
I'm not saying they don't have value,
but to move from volume to greater value,
uh, maybe even values.
Um, they say they can't do it successfully
so they're can sell 'em off arguably
to multinational companies who you may
or may not have courted.
Um, so the question is, where does that leave us
as a food producing nation?
Well, I mean, a couple points.
I I don't really feel qualified to sit here and,
and comment on Fonterras strategy.
They've got a lot of minds on the
job and it is their company.
And so they, they get to run their own strategy.
But what I would say is two things.
One, uh, almost all companies
that are successfully growing are focusing in some way.
So dispersion of attention is the biggest limitation
that we find to growth.
Whether you're dispersing across markets,
dispersing across categories.
Uh, so we, we really encourage companies to focus.
'cause when you focus, you can then
invest at that point of focus.
That's 0.1. Uh, 0.2, there's a lot of, uh, emerging,
uh, food brands, established food brands, um,
healthily competing out of New Zealand.
Uh, all, all over the world.
So yeah, this, in this city here, you have shop beverages.
You, um, you know, fixing fog, um, there's dozens of,
of food and beverage brands competing well,
uh, around the world.
So fontier is just, that's just one, one brand.
And can I, sorry, Mr.
Chairman, because I, I mean it is,
it's trade and enterprise.
Mm-Hmm. So, you know, as I've made this point before,
and so we, and you raised the point around productivity.
Mm-Hmm. I mean, it's better on the export sector.
Still very low as a country.
'cause one of the big challenges of all governments is to
how we lift our productivity.
So then you look at the single biggest company as an example
or you know, as a template,
and they certainly have contributed to
n zts success in many ways.
Um, one of the lessons that we can learn,
focus is one of them.
But if the shops
and the other little company's business model is simply
to sell off Sure.
Which is a lot of them do.
Is that the reason we left with a low productivity economy?
Uh, well, I, I think, you know, the economy is 25% exports
to GDP, uh, which has gone backwards.
Uh, that's a very, very low exports
as a proportion of this economy. Is
That because some of those companies have been sold off
and then manufacture or operate? No,
It's because it's very, very hard to scale,
uh, companies here.
Yeah. But also includes tourism. That's that dilemma. Okay.
And some, some companies that have sold,
we've had this discussion before,
like I think about like a sequence, uh, in Christchurch, um,
fantastic, innovative knowledge intensive company
that came out of Can university that, uh, got bought
by KKR, one
of the biggest private equity companies in the world.
They grew it to, I think, uh, 250 people.
Uh, then it got sold to Bentley
for 1.2 billion or something like that.
Um, and,
but the thing about it's, it's still in Christchurch
and it's still growing
and it's a big part of the China of the, uh,
Christchurch knowledge ecosystem makes a huge contribution
to that city and to the country.
And it will be hard to know of a local owner
that could have been able to get that, do that in that way.
So I think, as we've said
before, uh,
that sometimes the foreign investment works very, very well.
There's sometimes there's issues.
What Supplementary from Lawrence
Nan? Oh, no, no, no.
I have a, I have a primary question. Okay.
Sorry. Can I just say the, the, I appreciate
that there are a number of models like that, the net
or the assessment of the net benefit
and lift in productivity from that kind of evolution.
Um, do you do that at all or who does that?
Well, given
That you've got an enterprise obligation,
and that is that, you know,
and we have a productivity problem.
Our, our strategic objective is, is pretty
broad in that sense.
And that is the more exports as a proportion of the economy,
uh, the better it is for the economy,
the more productivity there'll be in the economy.
So we just hunt to grow exports.
That's where we focus, uh, on it.
Policy, economic strategy sits with mb, sits with, uh,
treasury, sits with, uh, cabinet, uh, as far, as far
as my word, as far as I've, they,
almost every cabinet is instructed us
to grow exports as that's what we do.
Okay. Including, including working at the enterprise.
A lot of it is, is all at the enterprise. Yeah.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
I know there are probably more questions along this line,
but I kind of wanna shift the focus just a tiny bit to, um,
something you kind
of mentioned in the annual report I was interested in
around investment migrants.
Now, I know that n entity works quite closely with INZ
around this, but I'm kind of curious in terms of some
of the figure that was mentioned.
You mentioned that there were 25
represents $38 million now under investment.
Now, the a IP Visa was very specific that for you
to get approval to transfer a minimum of $15 million
of funding into New Zealand within the six month.
So I'm curious to know where that funding kind of went.
With 25 approved, you should be looking at
not 38 or 9 million.
Uh, yeah, as you say, um, that's just at that point.
Uh, but then they've got a period of time of which to, uh,
allocate, uh, those investment funds.
So that's where the further five, five,
9 million comes in, which is the one that you said is to,
into New Zealand now pending.
Um, yeah. Yep.
Uh, and where they went, uh, 47% into equities,
uh, 30% into funds and 23% into direct investment.
Um, that's, that's the
proportion of where the money is going.
Interesting. Now, there's now about 96
applications in the system.
That's about 900 million of, uh, potential funding.
But again, uh, that's, yeah.
It takes a while for this money
to work its way through the system.
Do you see, I know that this is something also
that has done, um, reset kind of reasonably,
but do you see now with inflation
and with everything else, do you see $50 million as too low
Restaurant?
Um, well, to be clear, we're the operational agency,
not the policy agency.
Okay. So we, uh, we work
Within the setting. Yeah.
We, we, we, settings change.
We change. Yeah. Correct.
But I guess to turn it in the other way, um,
what have you heard from potential investor
migrants, for example?
Um, whether they are like, oh, just anecdotally, like, oh,
you know, that's, that doesn't seem like a lot.
Sure. Or people are like, Ooh, that's Yeah, sorry.
We're not gonna be able to do that.
So do you facilitate some of that conversation as well
with investor migrants, even though you don't set a policy,
you're just kind of carrying through?
Yes. We've got a responsibility to help attract them.
Yeah. So we've got a few people internationally that will go
to various locations and help attract Yeah.
Uh, we have to, uh, register those, uh,
entities that are legitimate for investment.
Yep. Uh, and then we do some aftercare of those investors.
And let's say it's still a relatively new scheme. Yep.
The numbers, the nine, six applications
working their way through the system.
Now that's, that's quite a significant number, uh,
about 900 million.
That being said, I mean, we have actually given advice
that we think the system is a bit tight at the moment.
Okay. Uh, and there are some categories of investment that,
that could be liberalized that is advice that we have given.
Now, one last question on this.
'cause you mentioned before you also go out
and potentially seek, um, investor,
potential investor migrants.
Yeah. Mm-Hmm. Do you have any internal policies
around whether you are looking at it from a ethical
perspective, a social perspective, uh, you know,
sustainable perspective
or is in discriminatory you're just finding
new investor migrants?
Well, they, they have to meet the, the settings.
They have to meet the, the, the criteria
that's being laid out in the
Scheme. But the
criteria doesn't necessarily mean, uh, you know,
like investing in productive investment in New Zealand.
Right. Does, does, the setting specifically says you need
to invest in things that are more productive, things
that will, um, provide job opportunities, things
that will provide, you know, economic benefits
or ongoing benefits.
Whereas things that just, there, like you said, equity,
you know, it doesn't have a direct translation sometimes,
or probably development may not have a direct translation
into jobs or productivity.
So is any of that being a part
of consideration rather than just purely looking
at the settings? Is it, are you Well,
The, the settings are specific on that question.
The, the, the immigration instructions, uh, ask us to
look at, uh, those types of direct investments, uh,
managed funds, equities that do contribute to the growth
of the country, um,
and particularly the growth of the export economy.
So that's, that is part of the instructions that are there.
And we think, as I said
before, we think some of that is, we've given some advice
to the policy agencies that we think some of
that's a bit tied, particularly some
of the property classes, social housing, aged care
that could probably hasn't been able
to attract investor migrant investment,
but probably should. Could
We get a copy of that and
or direct us to where we can find it on the
Website? Well, I think, I think,
um, the best way to interact
with this question is through Immigration New Zealand.
'cause they're the policy.
Thank you. Thank you.
Uh, just wanted to come back to the breakdown
of the focused customers as well by industry.
Yep. Um, how do you go about,
or do you have, first of all, a, a target for a percentage
of the different sectors you'd like represented in your
broader 1000 focused customers?
Not, not specifically. We look at where they are.
We look at what's tech, what's manufacturing,
what's food and beverage.
But we don't have a threshold that we artificially hunt.
So you'd be comfortable having 90% from
food and beverage, for example.
It's never, it's never worked out that way.
No, but what I'm saying, surely you must have some sort
of a gauge of where you want,
Uh, if you look at this, the segmentation criteria
that says, um, that I think we are really keen on as part
of the, the value added knowledge economy.
So you want, you want the sort
of higher value added type of company.
'cause we think success of governments, of both
all hugs have said that's the growth of the,
the direction of growth of the economy.
So that's the companies we choose to work on.
And roughly it's worked out about a third, uh, food
and beverage, uh, and value added food
and beverage, a third, uh, specialist manufacturing.
It's like, yeah. And jets and new dates, people like that,
and a third, uh, tech and services.
So, and that's, it's kind of moved around a bit.
Uh, but that's kind of roughly where it's,
where it's settled out as.
And I think to your point, I think if the board
and the team saw
that the whole thing was luing towards one direction,
I think they probably have something to say about
as were the ministers and demoing agency as well. But
It's never kind of worked out
Like that. Yeah, sure.
Um, it feels to me,
and what I'm hearing from the sector,
but in the tech space, is that there is
obviously massive growth happening in industry.
It's evolving incredibly rapidly. Yeah.
And I am just interested in your view on whether your team
is resourced with the capability to help facilitate
that growth into markets that, you know,
could it be a higher percentage than a third?
And would that be a good thing for us?
Because often tech companies can have a very
high level of productivity.
Uh, but what we've heard from some sector participants
actually through our, um, briefing on tariff barriers
that we have underway at the moment, is that they,
they're not necessarily having a higher level of confidence
that there is capability aligned with their needs
to help them engage with.
So when I started, um, it was about 5%
of the portfolio was Tech Datacom, uh, zero,
uh, couple of others.
Uh, now it's a third of the portfolio. So yeah.
300 odd companies. Uh, it's been a massive explosion.
Uh, what you say is exactly right.
We found that, uh,
tech companies are very different business models, uh,
tech companies, a lot of them run at a loss.
If you're a food and beverage manufacturer,
you're scratching your head.
'cause food and beverage, you know,
you money had to stay in the steel.
It costs you that much and you charge that much.
There's a gap between good
margin and that's how you make money.
But a tech company, they'll often be running at a loss
to huge amounts of r
and d aimed at some future point
where they monetize the amount of their customers.
That's a very, very different business model.
Therefore, we've had needed people,
employees who've come out of the tech sector.
Uh, we've need very different advice
about how to grow the companies.
We assess them on the international growth
funds, uh, quite differently.
Um, so you exactly right.
So the organization has organized around those things
of competency, those, those sectoral groupings.
Uh, and we know that you, uh,
we don't like our teams to be generalists.
We like them to have some sort of specialist familiarity.
And that's the same with the international teams.
And it's the same with domestic teams. Yeah. Okay.
Thank you. I'll just come back to one of, um, enterprise
and, and so while NB might have some responsibility,
you have as well, and so you've said in here, in your report
that you are going to cease activity
around the industry transformation plans.
And so can you just give a, an outline as to
where you see those, you saw those plans going
and what was their value to the sectors?
Um, well,
Given you are working on them Yeah.
Until just recently.
Yeah. Just leaving on the ITPs.
We still have sector, we still have some sector, um,
capability that works
On, that's not plan though.
It's capability. So these are industry transformation plans.
Mm-Hmm. That,
that you have been working on clearly with a purpose.
So what was that purpose?
The, the government of the day, uh,
changed the policy and changed the strategy.
So those things were, the transformation plans were stood
down, whether as the operational agency,
we were required no longer
to work on the industry transformation plans.
No, no. But that's
the prerogative of the government of the day.
No, that's right. But, but you were working on 'em
for a while with a, with an objective, which was what?
Well, were different for different plans, uh, as,
you know, uh, you know, put for a better world, uh, or,
or the, the food and beverage, food
and fiber industry transformation plan,
the manufacturing one, they were all after.
And that was, you know, some interesting part of 'em.
They were quite specific in the things that were trying
to bite off.
Um, but they were all trying to, all trying to grow
the sectors that they were engaged in,
the sectors that they, that they covered,
I presume more than just growth.
Otherwise you would just have a growth plan.
So it was a transformation plan.
So I'm, I'm genuinely trying to understand.
I wasn't over all of them. Yeah.
And to know what they were, but there were,
they were significant part Yeah.
Of a program that you had around enterprise
to move the sectors forward to hopefully be more, uh,
export focused and more productive.
We, we were one of a range of players.
I think that one of the good things about 'em is
that they did crowd in both public agencies, a range
of public agencies, and a range
of private enterprise into thinking about a
particular, uh, sector.
So we, we were just one, one player in in that.
So, but again, I mean, it's a bit, a little bit, um, yeah,
the government came out, well,
the very first things they did
was that they just stopped em.
So again, operational agency.
So what, follow the direction
of the government of the day, what
Did that then do?
Did this stopping of those, what, what did it do
to the industry sectors?
What did it do to the industry sectors?
Well, they'd only just started, so they didn't,
I don't think the, yeah, it was more the loss
of any potential upside that was there.
But also, uh,
there was a lot of money being spent on 'em as well.
So there was a number of different impacts.
Right. Tim Costley,
What's the biggest overarching goal you've got, um,
supporting government work coming into the end
of this year in review.
What's the biggest, um, objective
or goal you've been set that we are working towards?
Um, the, the, the overarching one,
which we find quite helpful is, it's not just us, is this,
uh, this construct to double the value
of exports over 10 years.
Uh, we've found that very good. Yeah.
Uh, it's been aspirational, motivational, it's put a lot
of energy, uh, into the system.
So, uh, you'll find, you know,
we've reframed our entire plan around doubling exports.
The biggest goal for us is
to help exports grow in particular type of exports.
Yeah. Uh, but also, you know, mission fire affairs
and trade mission primary industries.
Sure. Uh, tourism New Zealand, education, New Zealand,
they've all, you know, been motivated
by the similar aspiration and,
and doubling down on that concept.
And even a lot of the private sector organizations,
industry organizations, even individual companies I've heard
are sort of, kind of using that, that construct.
So it's been a pretty good, uh, sort of formula
for aligning and motivating people
to be a bit more ambitious about things.
And definitely internally, uh,
it's made quite a big difference to us.
So, and at appears, as the chair said, at the same time,
you've got less money, uh, and bigger aspiration,
but that's what productivity is.
You're just trying to gotta get more for less.
That's, yeah. And that's really the objective.
And, and just appreciating that this year goes from,
you know, mid 23 to mid 24, what was the equivalent sort
of goal at the start of that year, sort of at, at, you know,
July, 2023?
What was the goal for trade at that time?
Well, we, uh, we've got a set
of internal in there in the annual report, a set
of internal goals around, uh,
export deals we call 'em Yes.
And investment deals.
So that's how we break down the double exports aspiration
into specific things that we have to deliver. Uh, so,
But this is effectively a new one on top of those
that the doubling is just a, a, a big target to for, is
It? Well, the
doubling of sits across the entire system. Yeah.
Uh, our specific, uh, organizational goals are
around growing export deals,
but that's how we chase that target, uh, export deals,
international growth outcomes.
And on the investment side,
that's the direct economic impact
of the foreign direct
investment that's coming into the country.
So we, those are the metrics that we measure to try
and, uh, connect up to the, to the bigger goals.
So we are setting quite ambitious targets
for those, for those
Goals. And, and, and
what is, so at a starting point, when
that goal is set to double trade exports, what is the, uh,
what is the starting point?
What's the value of that?
And therefore, what's the value
that we are targeting to grow it, to
My understanding of the numbers is are, are in totality
and 95 billion is the current size of the goods
and services export economy.
So you're doubling that, doubling the value, uh,
the values in 10 years.
And that's a very good signal. We think the value,
the word value in there is very good.
And that's consistent with previous governments
that have been really focused on Yeah.
The value economy. So, um, so yeah. Yeah.
Two times 95
Free trade, nine barriers, all of that adds to
that value growth, not just pure quantity.
And, and, and,
and what would be the, the early signs,
as you look at the sort of the, the last year since
that came in, what are the early signs on
progress towards that goal?
Uh, it's been a hell of a tough year. Yeah.
That is a reality of, uh,
as the chair said in the opening comments, uh,
domestic market, very, very tough.
As tough as I can ever recall it. Yeah.
Um, and most companies would say that, uh,
externally, there's still a big covid hangover, uh,
particularly, and I don't wanna name
the individual companies here.
I was in Hawkes Bay last week, uh, visiting two companies.
Both of them, uh, had high growth during Covid goods.
Some food categories had high growth
during covid stocks built up.
Uh, and so now they had a very, very flat year.
So, um, so some parts
of the export economy very challenging,
but overall, as the chair said, uh, we're also seeing a lot
of growth stories in the export economy as well.
So we think, while it's been a very, very tough that year,
we think things are starting to up a bit.
Yeah. And, and, and,
and the final part of that, I think you said this
before, I just wanna understand, but having that set
as a goal Yeah.
That's helpful for galvanizing the work,
not just within your organization,
but across the different agencies that have
to contribute towards that, as well
as obviously the private sector,
Especially across the agencies.
Yeah, yeah. Just like a simple piece of human psychology.
Once you have a piece of language like that Yeah.
Uh, a time period, a metric can effectively double.
It's enormously powerful thing to have in the system
that people can orientate themselves,
uh, to, you have to ask
Yourself, what would have to be true for us
to do this in outlet?
Yeah. Yeah. So, so all the agencies are asking,
what would have to be true for us to be able to do this?
And that focus you focuses
You, it's a, it's a big number.
It's about, it's 7% is the number. Yes. Uh, 7% annual. Yeah.
Um, the best previous 10 years, uh, 4.6%.
So that's quite an uplift. It's pretty aspirational.
isn, eh? Yeah, it is. And so what, what the chair says is
that you can't, you can't get there by just
so we've reset our entire organization, uh, on
that particular aspiration.
We're really hunting for growth.
We've done a lot of data work on
where are the growth companies,
who's got the most growth potential.
Uh, we've kind of reset internally, got a beachhead system,
double the impact of Beachheads International Growth Fund.
Mm. You know, make that
get a lot more result per
international growth fund investment.
So we've gone through a lot of the settings and,
and said, okay, we need a lot more here.
It's not just about supporting companies to grow,
we actually want the growth.
Like really ambitiously want the growth.
So, but that's internally then across the system. Um, yeah.
Things like the missions, I think have,
again, inspired by that.
A lot more strategic,
a lot more impact coming outta the missions.
Yeah. Uh, because they've been set around growth.
You don't get to go on the missions
unless you bring some sort
of commercial outcome to the table.
Yeah. And that, so that's quite a, you'd be surprised
how well it's permeated the system.
Yeah. That's good. Thanks people.
So with that growth target in mind,
and given we've seen some progress this year
on new trade agreements, we see the implementation
of the N-Z-D-U-F-D-A over this year from
previous government's work.
Yeah. Um, but then more recently, the signing of the FTA
with the United Arab Emirates
and the wider Gulf Corporation Council.
How do you set yourself up to be resourced
to capitalize on that opportunity?
'cause it's all well in good signing the agreement.
We've gotta have businesses then taking up that opportunity
and driving economic growth from it.
Yeah. Um, ab absolutely.
Um, and there is one, there's one fundamental thing
that doesn't change is that we are more limited by our
domestic capacity than we are from the
availability of international markets.
So just 'cause we signed, uh, an FTA in the UK
and Europe doesn't mean you are gonna use the full capacity
of that FTA or any ft a for that matter.
What the FTAs do though,
is they open up options for companies Mm-Hmm.
About where the most profitable markets are.
But you won't necessarily just see full, the full capacity
of every FT a used, so No, exactly.
Someone to help facilitate.
Yeah. Yeah, totally. So, I mean,
the golf's pretty is very interesting.
You know, we're seeing a lot of
Saudi's a very interesting growth story.
Um, and a lot of companies are going into Saudi.
Um, and so the fact that it's been all opened up
with a free trade room is very, very interesting.
And we are, you know, we've talking about China,
and so China's a great market, was will be a great market
for a very, very long time.
Uh, but a lot of companies are sort of looking to sort of,
you know, what does diversification look like as well?
So we get options value from these free trade
agreements, uh, immensely.
Sorry, do you have a footprint on the ground? Yes.
In Saudi and Dubai? Yep. Yep.
And that, I mean, it's, uh, we didn't use
to have a footprint in Saudi, but we grew it again,
and we, we, we put our footprint where the companies go.
So we, we follow very carefully
where those thousand companies go.
It's called the target market. So a thousand companies.
The markets they target, uh, is the play is
where we put our capacity.
So, and for that reason, we're look closed a lot
and we've opened a lot.
It's quite important that we don't substitute our judgment
for the companies in terms of where they're best to go.
We, we follow them rather than,
than lead them most of the time. Which,
Which is a bit different from mfa, which, uh,
they're much more required to have a crystal ball, uh,
because, because they are thinking, you know, they're kind
of opening doors, opening up the world.
We are bringing the companies through.
Um, and so that's the kind of the, the, the interaction
between the, the good interaction between the two agencies.
So we, we tend to put our capacity where the,
where the company's going on that basis.
Um, the big growth story all over the Covid period, uh,
was Australia, but the USA, so we doubled up on the USA.
Okay. Uh, and that's, that's been an extraordinary,
it's an extraordinary economy way.
It consumes premium.
I value companies so supplementary from Damien.
Look, look, thank you. To go back to, um, aspirations.
Great. I, I think most young Kiwi boys
and girls probably start out playing rugby, aspire
to being all black one ferns, you know?
So, uh, but as the chair said, uh, what would have
to be true, and I think to focus on the truth
and truth is that 7% compounding growth to meet
that target, isn't
It? So
even through the period of Covid,
we had reasonably steady growth in exports.
Was that right? What was over the last 10?
Taking aside tourism,
but most of the export sector has performed pretty well,
I think the previous 10 years was 4.6%.
4.6, yeah.
So what would have to be true then to reach
that 7% compounding growth?
I'm not trying to destroy the aspiration.
I'm trying to deal with reality
For, for us, it's really doubling down on the companies
that have that growth potential and aspiration.
So we have to be very laser focused on, on the,
the capability and willingness to go
after that kind of growth.
Last, last one.
And so if arguably the single biggest
consumer focused export company onto of brands is
to be sold off with uncertain future, what might that do
to our aspirational targets?
Well, I, from what I've seen in er,
they're just simply trying to grow
and return as much as they can to the shareholders.
I don't think they would, they would argue in the way
that you are, you are arguing it.
And I must say, you know, when I went
to China a few weeks ago and I went
to the Fonterra application centers that you've been to
as well, I think, um, you know, they've got 500 people in,
uh, China and five application centers
who are tailoring, customizing ingredients.
I've got chefs, kitchens, uh, huge investment.
It's not consumer brand's investment.
It's food and grievance, food service investment.
Very aware. And, and yeah. And that is a massive investment.
And I think that's where their focus comes in.
I think what I hear them saying, they need to be able
to grow that part of the business,
and they can't grow two wings, uh, of the business.
So I still think that they're talking growth,
they're just not, they're just talking different type, um,
of growth and coming back to where the 7% is
and back to the previous discussion.
Um, but til was about, um, you know, the wait list economy,
uh, has got a higher growth
rate with the rest of the economy.
It's smaller, but it's growing at a faster rate.
Um, so that's, you'd expect that that has
to really be at a number above 7%.
You have to grow food and beverage at 7% at least,
because such a big part
of the economy if you're not growing it,
and all the upside of food and beverage is in value
because you, you know, you hit,
you've hit the commodity constraints
or big parts of the economy.
Uh, so it's a big, it's a value up
uplift, um, manufacturing.
Um, there's a lot of very good specialized manufacturing,
but it's a tough country to manufacture in and from.
Uh, so that's one that I, I actually
I'm mostly concerned about. Alright.
Dan Kirkpatrick, thank you. Um, thank you.
Welcome Peter from the Maori East Coast. Indeed.
Kirkpatrick from the East coast. Always gotta get that in.
Yeah, we do. Um, look, um, my question,
it'll be no surprise to you about Maori business.
Um, and uh, I deal, alright, you know, I have a lot
of constituents who are Maori businessmen
and women and exporters.
Um, they, uh, um,
and largely they, the main concern is, you know,
they, they get to the export.
Some of them being on the trade missions, they've done this.
But the big issue is when they get that first deal
and it's about pace scale,
and they just can't get over the line in time to,
to secure the big, um, the big deal.
Now, I know you do a lot of work with them
and I know, um, you know,
and thank you for your investment into the bay of Plenty,
uh, in a couple of areas that's been fantastic.
But what more can be done in this area?
You know, I note that over the past three years you've done
about 20 investment deals in the Maori business space,
but it's not growing and the potential in your own annual
report is massive for Maori business.
So how do we, um, what, what is the plan
or how do we, uh, upscale that, I guess to, to be able
to take the opportunity that exists in Maori business?
One of the things I'd say is if we look at our Maori
businesses in the focus group in the thousand,
they're generally earlier stage Mm-Hmm.
So there's some of our smaller businesses,
so their needs are slightly different
and the capability growth is bigger, so it's a slower burn.
Mm-Hmm. Um, we certainly, they're very ambitious
for themselves and we're very ambitious for them.
Um, but it is a slower It is, it is.
They have got further to go in general
because they're starting, they're, they're just smaller
and earlier in their journey.
Okay. And so the, the 346 Maori businesses, oh, sorry,
I'm just carrying on, um, 346 Maori businesses
that you were working with in financial year 24.
Uh, are they included in the 1000
or are they a separate number to the 1000?
They're in the 1000.
So there's, there's two, um, you're quoting from two, um,
slightly different data sets there.
One is on the export side. Yep.
So that's the number you just said is on the export sides,
they're Maori exporters.
Yes. Um, and, uh, as the chair said, um, there's a,
what we call a missing middle with Maori business.
There's lots of little ones and there's a few big ones.
Yeah. But again, their,
their dilemma isn't like New Zealand's dilemma on steroids.
It's, it's how to scale to get up. Yeah. Yeah.
And, um, and so,
And the access to investment is,
And that's the second one, is the investment.
Uh, and that's Maori as investors
or recipients of investment.
Mm-Hmm. Uh, that part of the business has grown a lot.
I think, I think 1.2 billion from memory, uh,
was actually the, the investment deal flow for Maori, either
as investors or I investee.
Um, so, and that's been a big focus, uh,
area will continue to be as well.
Um, it is an exciting part of the economy.
Um, yeah, great to work with, uh, ambitious,
aspirational, uh, huge sense of, of history
and their own companies.
Um, you know, they're not, they're long term,
they partner really well with global companies.
Mm. Um, some of the relationship between Japanese
and Maori companies has been exceptional.
Um, and so yeah.
And that's why we, we have um,
they are slightly, got slightly different needs.
Yeah. Uh, so we service them in a slightly different way
'cause of that 'cause of, we've got dates.
Okay. Thank you. Thanks.
Yeah. I'm interested on that around the, um, ratio
of potential direct economic impact being assessed
as much higher from our businesses.
Um, can you just delve into a bit
of why you see that as the facts
That's on the investment side?
Mm-Hmm. Um, it's probably a result
of the specific deals that went through.
Uh, 'cause that number moves around an enormous amount.
Uh, it's very, very deal specific.
How that works is, um, yeah, I think
Damien quite likes this one.
I, um, if a company just comes in
and buys another company, the RDEI or the, or sorry.
The PDEI, the potential direct economic impact is zero.
'cause there's no additional, so when the Chinese came in
and bought transpacific Yeah.
Uh, it was just a straight out purchase.
They didn't do anything to upscale it.
They build a big RD facility.
Now there was, so RDI was, it was a $900 million deal.
Uh, but the PDI was zero mm-Hmm.
Uh, and another situation, you, someone will come in
and they'll buy a company and they'll double it.
They'll triple it, you know, like a bit likewe. Mm. Yeah.
They come in and they build a whole new factory. Mm.
Uh, in the hawke space. So the PDI you get a big uplift
from, from that investor.
Okay. So, and
because of those uplifts, uh, they move around a lot.
So I don't think there's anything specific to the,
to the Maori population that I know of
that will give them a higher pd,
just a collection of those projects.
But those particular projects, I think they had,
didn't they have some hostels that they invested in
and some spas and some stuff like that.
Our Supplementary,
Thank you so much Mr.
The chair. Just following on from that line of question,
we're also seeing that there is kind of quite a bit
of fluctuation in terms of export trade deals for, um, for,
for Maori customers, um, over the last three years.
Would you say that it's the same reason they just explained
is to do with nature of the deal,
why there are opportunities that n is looking at
to stabilize some of these fluctuations?
Yeah. Trying to think why that would be.
Um, because Maori overrepresented in food and beverage.
Yeah. Uh, so food
and beverage was uh, deemed essential during, uh, covid.
So anyone attached to food
and beverage, um,
the previous minister had a big influence on that very,
very important decision for the sector.
Um, and so, uh, that actually benefits Maori,
uh, yeah, of course.
Yeah. But let me, sorry, one little one.
So for example, in the financial year, 2022,
we're looking at export trade deals.
This is on page 39 of the report.
You look at 64 million, then financial year,
twenty twenty three, a hundred twenty 2 million.
Then financial year 20 24, 90 8 million.
So this is sort of post, I guess post ish pandemic
or is this due sort
of along the same line as what you're saying? Mm-Hmm.
Yeah, we wouldn't, and like, uh, between 1 22 and
and 98, that could just be one deal.
Okay. There's not, there's not a huge variation
that it's not as lumpy as it was.
No, no, exactly. Right. And
In general, uh, f
and b businesses are more exposed to China as well,
and Maori are a bigger portion
of FB businesses. So that has
An impact. I think the real story,
if you took that graph back, uh,
three years, uh, much, much be way less Maori companies,
I think we, yeah, there'll be way less, um, uh, export,
uh, way less focused customers, uh,
way less trade deals, way less investment deals.
So that's what's really grown up over that period
and that, that has been a deliberate strategy over,
over successive governance actually.
Yeah.
Excellent. Alright. That brings us to the end
of our hearing today for NZ Trade and Enterprise.
Peter, Jennifer, thank you very much for your time and
All the best with the aspirational targets
that have been set for you.
And can I just say, um,
I think you really enjoyed this committee.
Um, it's been substantial.
I mean, you're actually asking questions of strategy
that we are grappling with
and it's a really good thing to talk about.
So if this way scrutiny he takes us then fantastic.
Um, that's been a very good, yeah. Excellent.
One last thing. I actually do a international organization.
I do a blog. He's so, uh,
can you just gimme a, just a thumbs up.
Gimme a thumbs up. Yeah.
How I explained to our, we've got a lot
of non-democratic countries in our portfolio.
Yeah. That, and so I, I explained
how our democracy works to them.
So I'm taking the photo of you with a front
of the committee being grilled.
Take. Here we go. He is got the selfie guard.
Yeah. No, that's what you gotta do. Selfie.
He looks too bloody comfortable.
Ruin the perception. Thank you. End of the live session.
We'll move now back to private session.
Also, enjoy your afternoon. Good to.